---
CoIP: 1
Title: Compact Improvement Proposal Process
Authors:
  - Bob Blessing-Hartley (bobblessinghartley)
  - Kevin Millikin (kmillikin)
Status: Proposed
Category: Governance
Created: 21-JAN-2026
Requires: none
Replaces: none 
---

<!--
 This file is part of Compact.
 Copyright (C) 2026 Minokawa project contributors
 SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
 Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
 you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
 You may obtain a copy of the License at

     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 limitations under the License. 

 Some portions of this work were adapted from the Midnight Improvement
 Proposal (MIP) process, which is covered by the following copyright notice:
 
 > Copyright 2025 Midnight Foundation
 
 > Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
 > you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
 > You may obtain a copy of the License at
 
 >     https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 
 > Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 > distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 > WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 > See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 > limitations under the License.
-->

## Abstract

A Compact Improvement Proposal (CoIP) is a formalised design document for the Compact community, and also the name of the process by which such documents are produced and listed.
A CoIP provides information or describes a change to the Compact programming language, tooling, or development processes concisely and in sufficient technical detail.
In this CoIP, we explain what a CoIP is, how the CoIP process functions, the role of the Compact Technical Steering Committee (TS), and how users should go about proposing, discussing, and structuring a CoIP.

The Minokawa project intends CoIPs to be the primary mechanisms for proposing new features, collecting community input on an issue, and documenting design decisions that have gone into Compact.
Plus, because CoIPs are text files in a versioned repository, their revision history is the historical record of significant changes affecting Compact.

## Motivation

CoIPs aim to address two challenges mainly:

- The need for various parties to agree on a common design in order to create interoperable tools or interfaces.
- The need to propose and discuss changes to the Compact language, tooling, or processes.

The CoIP process does not *by itself* offer any form of governance.
For example, it does not govern the process by which proposed changes to the Compact programming language are implemented and deployed.
Yet, it is a crucial, community-driven component of the governance decision pipeline as it helps to collect thoughts and proposals in an organised fashion.
Additionally, specific projects may choose to actively engage with the CoIP process for some or all changes to their project.

The process detailed herein is intentionally lightweight and is expected to expand evolve as the Compact community grows.
This document outlines the technical structure of the CoIP and the technical requirements of the submission and review process. 

## Specification

### Versioning

The specification in this CoIP will be versioned using semantic versioning (SemVer).
Any changes to the specification must be submitted as a new CoIP if they affect backwards compatibility or introduce new requirements.

### Process Overview

The Compact Improvement Proposal (CoIP) process consists of the following stages:

1. **Idea formulation:** An idea for an improvement is conceived.
   Simple improvements (like performance improvements or better error messages) and bug fixes generally do not need a CoIP.
   These can be submitted directly to the [Compact issue tracker](https://github.com/LFDT-Minokawa/compact/issues) instead.
   Bigger improvements first start with an idea.
   This could be a Compact feature request or arise out of other discussion.
   In any case, it's a good idea to vet the idea publicly in some way to gauge if it fits a genuine need and is likely to be acceptable.
   It's **very** important that proposed changes are well-motivated.
   Adding features and changing implementations has a cost, which must be justified by a corresponding benefit.
1. **CoIP drafting:** A formal CoIP document is created.
   This is a document that follows the template structure below.
   The CoIP document is added to the `coips` subdirectory with the name `coip-XXXX.md` (those are literal `X`s).
   The status of the CoIP is set to **Draft** and a pull request (PR) is made to add the draft document.
1. **TSC approval of the draft:** The TSC approves merging the draft CoIP PR.
   Note that this is **not** the same as acceptance of the CoIP.
   The TSC will vote to merge the draft CoIP PR at their next regularly scheduled meeting.
   They will ensure that the document is correctly formatted, that is it clear and understandable, and that it is well motivated.
   The TSC will be generally lenient at this stage with the understanding that problems can be addressed before the CoIP is submitted.
   If the TSC deems the CoIP is not yet ready for approval, it will be sent back to the authors with specific feedback.
   If the TSC approves the CoIP, they will assign it a number and add it to the CoIP index document as a draft CoIP.
1. **Discussion and update:** The CoIP authors address feeedback to get it in shape for submission.
   Discussion should happen in some public forum, such as the LFDT or Midnight Discord server.
   The Compact issue tracker can be used to raise and track issues.
   Contributors can send pull requests to improve the draft CoIP.  _[KSM: there's an issue here because the CoIP authors can't necessarily merge these.]_
1. **Submission:** The CoIP is submitted to the TSC for consideration.
   The CoIP authors do this by filing an issue in the Compact repository, asking for the TSC to consider the CoIP for acceptance.
   The issue should be assigned to the TSC chair.
   The status of the CoIP is set to **Submitted**, and there should be no more substantive modifications to the document
   (small changes like spelling and punctuation fixes are OK).
1. **Review and Discussion:** The community and TSC review and discuss the CoIP.
   The TSC will announce a period of community commentary, which usually will last at least two weeks.
   They will announce in the submission issue that they will discuss the CoIP at a specific regularly scheduled TSC meeting after the commentary period has passed.
1. **TSC decision:** The TSC decides to approve the CoIP or not.
   The TSC will vote to accept (status **Accepted**) or reject (status **Rejected**) the CoIP.
1. **Implementation:** Accepted CoIPs are implemented by development teams.
   The TSC's acceptance represents a decision for the project to adopt the proposed improvement.
   For language features or tooling improvements, this requires contributors to actually plan and perform the implementation work.
   For process improvements, it requires us to take steps to adopt the process.
   When implementation is completed the CoIP's status is changed to **Implemented**.
1. **Release:** Implemented changes make it into a released version of the Compact language or tools.
   The Compact release managers will make releases of the language and tools.
   Implemented changes will not necessarily make it into the very next release (for example, a breaking language change might have to wait for a planned major version increment).
   When an implemented CoIP makes it into a release, the status is changed to **Released** and the release version is noted (for example, **Released in Compact 1.7**).

### CoIP Categories

CoIPs are categorized to help organize and manage the different types of proposals:

- **Language:** Changes to the Compact language (including the standard libraries) and its implementation (such as the API of generated JavaScript code, use of Impact and ZKIR, etc.).
- **Tooling:** Proposals to add or modify the Compact suite of tools.
- **Process:** Proposals related to the way that the Compact project is run (such as versioning, releases, documentation management, etc.), including project governance.
- **Informational:** Provides general information, guidelines, or research related to the Compact but does not propose a specific change.

### CoIP Statuses

CoIPs can have the following statuses mentioned in the Process Overview above:

- **Draft:** The CoIP has been sent as a PR to the Compact repository, is merged, and is undergoing writing and revision.
- **Submitted:** A draft CoIP has been submitted to the TSC for consideration.
  Writing and revision are done.
- **Accepted:** The TSC has voted to accept a submitted CoIP.
  For accepted informational CoIPs, this is the final status.
- **Rejected:** The TSC has voted to reject a submitted CoIP.
- **Implemented:** The improvement described in the CoIP has been implemented.
  For accepted process CoIPs, this is the final status.
- **Released:** The implemented improvement has made it into a release of the language or tools.
  For accepted language and tooling CoIPs, this is the final status.

In addition, there are other statuses that are special in that they represent events occurring outside the normal process described above:

- **Superseded:** A newer CoIP replaces this CoIP.
  The newer (accepted) CoIP explicitly does this by including as part of the proposal that it supercedes the superceded CoIP ("Supercedes CoIP-1234", for instance).
- **Obsolete:** The CoIP is no longer considered relevant.
  The TSC will occasionally vote to label CoIPs this way for clarity.
- **Withdrawn:** The author(s) have withdrawn the CoIP.
  This can happen at any time before the TSC votes to accept or reject the CoIP.

#### Submission

When a draft CoIP is "finished" to the authors' satisfaction, it should be submitted by filing an issue in the [Compact issue tracker](https://github.com/LFDT-Minokawa/compact/issues).
The issue should specify the CoIP number and ask the TSC to formally consider it for acceptance.
The issue should be assigned to the TSC chair.
The TSC will announce the commentary period and when they will vote on the proposal.
After submitting for TSC consideration, the CoIP should not be substantially altered.

#### Review and Discussion

Once a CoIP is submitted, it enters a period of public review and discussion.
Feedback is encouraged from all Compact community members.
Discussion should take place on the GitHub issue or by attending a Compact TSC meeting.
Technical experts may be consulted for specific aspects of the proposal.

#### Implementation

Once a CoIP is accepted, it becomes a candidate for implementation.
Engineering teams (Shielded architects & engineers, community contributors) will implement the changes specified in the CoIP.

### Artifacts and Tools

- **CoIP Document:** The core artifact is the CoIP document itself, written in Markdown and stored in the Compact repository.
- **CoIP Template:** A standardized Markdown template for creating CoIPs (see below).
- **GitHub Repository:** The `coips` subdirectory (in the Compact repository) on GitHub will be used to:
    - Store all CoIP documents.
    - Track the status of each CoIP.
    - Facilitate discussion through PRs and issues.
- **Discussion Forums:** The Compact issue tracker and the LFDT and Midnight Discord servers should be used for broader discussions and early-stage idea sharing. 
- **Meeting Notes:** Notes from any meetings related to CoIP discussions should be publicly available in this GitHub repository or linked from it.

### Technical Steering Committee

The CoIP process relies on a the Technical Steering Committee (TSC) to act as the CoIP editors, to manage the process, ensure quality, and facilitate community discussion.

#### Role and Responsibilities

The TSC is responsible for:

- Ensuring that CoIPs adhere to the CoIP template and meet the minimum quality standards (e.g., clarity, completeness, technical soundness).
- Assigning CoIP numbers.
- Tracking the progress of CoIPs.
- Facilitating community discussion and helping to resolve technical disagreements.
- Voting to accept or reject a CoIP.
- Maintaining the CoIPs in the Compact repository, including a index of them and their statuses.

### Implementation Plan

Describe how the CoIP will be executed.
This may include:
- Timeline for integration into Compact core software
- Teams responsible for development
- Testing and audit milestones

### CoIP Template

All CoIP documents *must* follow this Markdown template and use YAML front matter:

CoIP: <Number> # assigned by editors

Title: <Proposal Title>

Authors: <Name> <github-username>

Status: <Status> # All new CoIPs will assigned Proposed

Category: <Core | Standards | Networking | Governance | Informational>

Created: YYYY-MM-DD

Requires: [List of other CoIPS this CoIP depends on]

Replaces: [List of a CoIP that this one replaces]

License: Apache-2.0

## Abstract

A short (~200 word) description of the proposed improvement.

## Motivation

Why is this change needed?
What problem does it solve?
Clearly explain the use cases and the benefits for the Compact ecosystem.

## Specification

Describe the proposed change in detail.
This section should be technically precise and unambiguous.
It should provide enough information to allow for implementation.

## Rationale

Explain the design decisions behind the proposed change.
Why was this particular approach chosen?
What alternatives were considered, and why were they rejected?

## Path to Active

What does it mean to get from Accepted to Active, and how this will be achieved.

### Acceptance Criteria

Explain what objective milestones need to be achieved in order for the CoIP to achieve Active status.

### Implementation Plan 

Describe how the CoIP will be put into practice.

## Backwards Compatibility Assessment

Describe how the proposed change affects existing systems, applications, and users.
Will it require a hard fork?
Are there any compatibility issues?
How will they be addressed?

## Security Considerations

Analyze the potential security implications of the proposed change.
Are there any new attack vectors or vulnerabilities introduced?
How will they be mitigated?

## Implementation

Describe how the proposed change will be implemented.
Which parts/components of the Compact need to be modified?
What are the dependencies, if any?

## Testing

Describe the testing procedures for the proposed change.
What tests will be performed to ensure that it works as expected and does not introduce any regressions?

## References (Optional)

Are there any external sources that are referenced in this document, or that add to the efficacy of this CoIP?

## Acknowledgements 

List the contributors that were not the Authors, this will include any workshop participants. 

## Copyright Waiver

All contributions (code and text) submitted in this CoIP must be licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
Submission requires agreement to the Compact Foundation Contributor License Agreement [Link to CLA], which includes the assignment of copyright for your contributions to the Foundation.
